# H5MANIPULATOR
### Read, Rearrange, and Write HDF5 files with 10x Genomics conventions

## Requirements

`H5MANIPULATOR` requires libraries for HDF5 files. On Windows, these are bundled with the `rhdf5` package. On Linux/Unix, you will need to first install hdf5 libraries.

This can usually be accomplished with:
```
sudo apt-get install hdf5-dev
```
or
```
sudo yum install hdf5-dev
```

Once hdf5 libraries are available, you can proceed to installation of `rhdf5`.

The `rhdf5` package is provided through BioConductor, and can be installed using:
```
if(!"BiocManager" %in% .packages(all.available = TRUE)) {
  install.packages("BiocManager")
}
BiocManager::install("rhdf5")
```

`H5MANIPULATOR` also requires the `data.table`, `ids`, and `Matrix` packages, which are available on CRAN and should be automatically installed by `install_github()`.

# Installation

This package can be installed from Github using the `devtools` package.

You may first need to register your GitHub PAT, as this is a private repository.

Get access token from github:
- Navigate to  [Settings / Developer settings](https://github.com/settings/apps)
- Click [Personal access tokens](https://github.com/settings/tokens)
- Generate new token (or re-generate if you have an existing one but you didn't copy it to your password manager).
- Under **Select scopes**
- Give the token **repo** scope

from github:
> Make sure to copy your new personal access token now. You won’t be able to see it again!

```
Sys.setenv(GITHUB_PAT = "your-access-token-here")
devtools::install_github("bwh-bioinformatics-hub/H5MANIPULATOR")
```

#  .h5 structure

The h5 produced here has the addition of richer metadata and additional results.


# Reading .h5 files



### Reading as a Seurat object

We can read and .h5 file directoy into a Seurat object using read_h5_seurat():

```
library(H5MANIPULATOR)

so <- read_h5_seurat(h5_file)
```

This function places the RNA-seq counts in the "RNA" assay.

### Reading as a SingleCellExperiment object

Likewise, we can read directly into a SingleCellExperiment object for use with BioConductor packages using read_h5_sce().

```
library(H5MANIPULATOR)

sce <- read_h5_sce(h5_file)
```

Note that this requires a recent version of SingleCellExperiment (>= 1.8.0).



### Reading the matrix directly

There is a convenience function to directly read the main cell x gene matrix from the HDF5 file, read_h5_dgCMatrix():

```
library(H5MANIPULATOR)

mat <- read_h5_dgCMatrix(h5_file)
```

**Note:** By default, this matrix will be 1-indexed for convenient use in R. If you would rather retrieve a 0-indexed matrix, set the index1 parameter to FALSE:
```
mat <- read_h5_dgCMatrix(h5_file,
                         index1 = FALSE)
```

### Reading cell metadata directly

A convenience function is provided to retrieve all cell/observation-based metadata, read_h5_cell_meta():
```
cell_meta <- read_h5_cell_meta(h5_file)
```
Note that for the test dataset, this is only the cell barcodes, as additional metadata are not present.

### Reading feature metadata directly

A similar function is also provided for gene/feature-based metadata, read_h5_feature_meta():
```
feat_meta <- read_h5_feature_meta(h5_file)
```


### Reading and separating out all contents

To read the entirety of an HDF5 file as a list object, use h5dump():
```
library(H5MANIPULATOR)

h5_list <- h5dump(h5_file)
str(h5_list)
```
This is a very raw representation of the contents of these HDF5 files. You may want to convert the major components to a sparse matrix (for cell x gene counts), and a data.frame (for metadata):
```
h5_list <- h5_list_convert_to_dgCMatrix(h5_list,
                                        target = "matrix")
                                        
mat <- h5_list$matrix_dgCMatrix

feature_metadata <- as.data.frame(h5_list$matrix$features[-1])
```
Now, mat will consist of a dgCMatrix with genes as rows and barcodes as columns, and feature_metadata will be a data.frame with genes as rows and various metadata as columns. 

For this test dataset, there isn't any cell metadata. However, files that are generated by our pipeline will include a substantial metadata set stored in matrix/observations. This can be retrieved with:
```
cell_metadata <- cbind(data.frame(barcodes = h5_list$matrix$barcodes),
                       as.data.frame(h5_list$matrix$observations))
```



